Essay on proteins as drug targets

A drug targets is a specific molecule often a protein in the body that is closely linked to a particular disease process and can be influenced by a drug to produce a desired therapeutic outcome(CMC II, 2007). The drug target is the native protein in the body whose activity is modified by a drug resulting in a desirable therapeutic effect. Different drugs act on molecular targets at different locations in the cell. In the human body, all cells have membrane that encloses the cytoplasm. (Yanghe et al, 2017)

Evidence based Molecular targeted therapies which interfere with specific targeted molecules necessary for cancer progression have been developed intensively during the past decade(Unoki et al,  2009)

Targeted therapy is a type of cancer treatment that targets proteins that control how cancer cells grow, divide, and spread. It is the foundation of precision medicine. As researchers learn more about the DNA changes and proteins that drive cancer, they are better able to design treatments that target these proteins(NCI, 2022).

Types of Targeted therapy 

Most targeted therapies are either small-molecule drugs or monoclonal antibodies.

a. Small-molecule drugs are small enough to enter cells easily, so they are used for targets that are inside cells.

b. Monoclonal antibodies, also known as therapeutic antibodies, are proteins produced in the lab. These proteins are designed to attach to specific targets found on cancer cells. Some monoclonal antibodies mark cancer cells so that they will be better seen and destroyed by the immune system. Other monoclonal antibodies directly stop cancer cells from growing or cause them to self-destruct. Still others carry toxins to cancer cells.(NCI, 2022).

Case studies of Targeted therapy in cancer treatment 

On November 26, 2018, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted an accelerated approval to larotrectinib (Vitrakvi) for the treatment of some adults and children with cancer whose tumors have a gene fusion involving one of the NTRK genes. The new approval—the first for a TRK-targeted drug—covers both the pill and liquid forms of larotrectinib. The liquid form was specifically developed for use in children.

The approval by FDA was based on findings from a series of small clinical trials in patients with an array of cancer types, including many rare cancers. In the trials, larotrectinib was shown to be highly effective at either shrinking tumors or keeping them from progressing, often for long periods

Initial results from a series of three small clinical trials of a targeted cancer therapy called larotrectinib suggest that it may be effective in patients—children and adults—with a wide variety of cancer types. The drug disrupts the activity of TRK proteins caused by an alteration, known as a fusion, in a family of genes known as NTRK. In all three trials, larotrectinib treatment shrank tumors in many patients whose tumor cells overexpressed TRK fusion proteins. And larotrectinib appeared to largely be safe, with little evidence thus far from the trials that it causes any serious side effects(NCI, 2018)

References

Comprehensive medicinal Chemistry II(2007) volume 3, 2007, pages 87-106

National Cancer Institute(2022) Targeted Therapy To Treat Cancer. 

Yanghe, F., Wang, Q., Wang, T.(2017) Drug Target Protein-Protein interaction Networks:A Systematic Perspective. Biomed. Res.Int.

Unoki, M., Kumamoto, K., and Harris, C.C.(2009) ING Proteins as potential anticancer drug targets. Current drug targets, 10(5):442-454.
